This video we'll learn about C++ is move constructor and move semantics these features were introduced
in C++ 11 and they can be difficult to understand.
So we'll take it slow and one step at a time while move semantics is not considered a beginning C++
topic.
It's important to understand it conceptually.
So you can identify it in code when you see it.
One of C++ elevons most pervasive features was probably move semantics and to really understand move
semantics it's important to be able to tell whether an expression is an l value or an r value if you
need a refresher about L values and our values.
Please refer to the L values in our values video in Section 12 of this course.
But a useful rule of thumb is that when you can refer to an object by name or you can follow a pointer
to get to an object then that object is addressable and it's an l value and our values are everything
else.
But in the context of move semantics our rallies refer to temporary objects that are created by the
compiler and objects returned from methods.
As you can see in this slide when the expression 100 plus 200 is evaluated the compiler stores 300 and
an unnamed temporary value.
This value is not addressable So it's an r value the R value is then assigned to the l value total.
The same happens with objects.
However with objects that can be a great amount of overhead of copy constructors are called over and
over and over again.
Making copies of these temporary objects.
Then when we have raw pointers and we have to do deep copies then the overhead is even greater.
This is where move semantics and move constructor comes into the picture.
Our value objects are the objects that move semantics addresses.
We know that copy constructors are called whenever the compiler needs to make a copy of an object.
We also know that if our class contains a raw pointer then we must implement deep copy.
However this can be computationally expensive since we have to allocate space for the copy and then
copy the data over to C++ move constructor moves the object rather than copies it.
This can be extremely efficient.
Move constructors are optional if you don't provide them then the copy constructor will be called.
But it's a good idea to use move constructors for efficiency.
Finally when you run your code and step through it in the debugger you might see move constructors being
called.
In fact sometimes you may not even see the copy constructor being called.
If you experience this is probably due to something called copy elision copy elision is a compiler optimization
technique that eliminates unnecessary copying.
Compilers are really smart with their optimizations now and one of the common techniques is called Return
Value optimization.
That's when the compiler generates code that doesn't create a copy of a return value from a function
making the code much more efficient.
So let's start by talking about R-value references.
We've already seen l value references which are references to L values.
Well R-value references are references to our values in the context of move semantics.
Think of our value references as references to those temporary objects that we were talking about.
L value references are declared using a single ampersand like we've done but R-value references are
declared using two ampersands.
Let's see some examples in this example will see the difference between an l value reference and an
r value reference.
First we declare x as an integer and initialize it to 100.
In this case x is an l value it's addressable and it's got a name.
Now we can create l ref as a reference to X and since x is an l value this is an l value reference.
We can use L ref to refer to X..
Nothing new.
This is stuff we've seen already.
But now let's see what an r value reference looks like.
Our ref is declared isn't our value ref to an integer with the double ampersand operator and we set
it to refer to 200 since 200 is an r value.
This makes ref an r value reference.
Now we can actually assign 300 to our ref which stores 300 into the R value of where our ref refers
to.
In other words we just change that temporary variable.
Notice that if we try to assign an l value to an r value reference we get a compiler error which makes
perfect sense.
So now let's look at l value references in the context of function parameters.
This is what we've been doing all along up to this point in the course.
We have an integer x we initialized it to 100 x is an l value.
Now look at the function phunk it expects an l value reference as denoted by the single ampersand.
So it wants an l value if we call func pass in x.
Then this is OK since x is an l value and none will be the reference to an l value.
But what happens if we call func with 200.
Well 200 is not an l value it's an r value and the compiler will generate an error.
You can see the error message below that the compiler generates.
Now let's look at our value references in the context of function parameters.
We again have defined X to be an integer and initialized it to 100.
This time we declare func is a function that expects an r value reference and we did note that with
the double ampersands.
So it wants an r value.
If we call func and pass in 200 This is OK since 200 is at our value.
And now Gnome will be a reference to an r value.
But what happens if we call func with X while we get an error message X is not an r value it's an l
value.
So the compiler generates the error and you can see the message it generates below.
Now we can overload these functions and have both of them in our code at the same time since they have
unique signatures and the compiler will call the correct function depending on whether the parameter
is an l value in our value.
We're going to take advantage of this when we defined the move constructor.
So now let's see how this works with the move constructor in a class here I've created a class named
move and it has a raw pointer as a data member.
This class is similar to the shallow and deep classes we used earlier in the section the rest of the
class methods are pretty standard and we've seen them before.
Notice that we've included a copy constructor that does a deep copy.
We have not defined the move constructor yet.
We'll do that soon.
But first let's look at the copy constructor.
Here's the code for the copy constructor.
Again pretty standard deep copy.
We allocate storage and then we copy the data.
Now we run a simple main that creates a vector of some move objects and we call the vector Veck and
we push back to move object.
Now notice what's happening in the argument list.
Move 10 and move 20 or creating temporary objects.
Unnamed.
So they're going to be our values.
What happens is that the compiler is going to use the copy constructor to make copies of these guys.
So here's the sample output from that program you can see these constructors and destructors and copy
constructor is being called.
In fact you can see that the copy constructor is doing several DB copies which can be inefficient.
Now let's add the move constructor to the class to make it much more efficient.
So what is the move constructor actually do.
Well instead of making a deep copy like the copy constructor does well instead of making a DB copy has
the copy constructor does it simply moves the resource its on the heap.
And the way we do that is just to assign the pointer from the source object to the current object.
You might be thinking isn't that what default member wise copy is and yes it is.
But now the difference is that we know out the pointer in the source object.
So what we have now is an object who owns the data on the heap and then the original object with a pointer
to that data.
This is real efficient since we're not doing a copy at all.
Before we implement the move constructor let's look at its syntax.
As you can see it's very similar to the syntax for a copy constructor but it's got two differences.
First there's no conc qualifier for the parameter source.
There can't be because we need to modify it in order to null out its pointer.
And second the parameter is an r value reference and you can see that with the double ampersands you
can see in the last two declarations what the move constructor prototype might look like for a player
class and the move class.
So here we're adding the move constructor prototype to the move class declaration and now we need to
implement it.
Notice how simple the implementation is.
We simply copy source dot data to data.
That's a simple copy of a pointer data member.
Again we're not copying what it's pointing to.
We're not doing a deep copy.
Then we know our source data.
This step is really important.
Otherwise we end up with the equivalent of a shallow copy and not to move.
That's it.
Many resources that describe the move constructor say that it steals or pilfered the data and then it
nulls out the source pointer.
And that's really a good way to think about it.
That's exactly what it's doing.
Now we've got our same program and when we execute it instead of the copy constructor is being called
for those temporary objects to move constructors will be called because there are values and it's going
to be much more efficient than doing deep copies.
So let's took a look at the output now.
As you can see there are no copy constructor calls at all.
And the move constructor is indeed being called.
You can also see when the destructors are called for no pointer that's destroying the object that we
just moved and said it's data pointer to know.
So there you go that's a basic introduction to R-value references in the move constructor.
I know it's complicated you probably have to watch this video a few times but don't worry.
Everybody goes through this it's a difficult topic to understand.
We'll see move semantics again in the next section of the course when we overload the assignment operator
to do both copy and move.
There's so much more to move semantics in the move constructor that are better left for more advanced
course but now you know the foundations and you'll be fine when you learn about them.
So let's head over to the idea and run this program and see it in action OK.
So I mean the idea again though in this section 13 workspace in the move constructor project and what
I've got here is that class move that we use in the slides.
It's kind of raw pointer to an integer.
It's got get set methods and your typical constructor a copy constructor destructor.
Now you'll notice that I've got a move constructor here but I've commented it out because I'm going
to run this first with only the copy constructor so you can see what's going on.
And you write here's the copy constructor on line 17 Here's my implemented copy constructor again I've
commented out the move constructor will uncomment that at a moment.
And here's my destructor.
My district looks a little different because if my data is not equal to the null pointer then I'm just
saying what I'm destroying.
Otherwise I'm just saying that I'm destroying null pointer and that's important because it will let
us know if we are destroying those objects that we just moved in or be really easy to see when it says
no pointer.
OK so here's my main.
I'm creating a vector of move objects and I'm simply calling pushback and I'm supplying move in here.
Now you'll notice there's no variable name there right so that's going to create a temporary object
and a temporary object is an r value.
So in this case it's going to use the copy constructor once we put the move constructor in it's going
to use that.
So let's walk through this example and go see what's happening.
So I'll start the debugger.
And I move the window over here to the right and this is where we're at right here.
So first thing we need to do is we need to construct this object we need to create that temporary object
and we're going to use the constructor to do that.
So we'll step through here.
You can see the constructor being called here.
It's going to allocate that object on the heap and store whatever we passed it into it.
We're going to display constructor for 10.
And now we're in the copy constructor because remember we just created this temporary right.
So this temporary and needs to be copied into the vector.
So we in the copy constructor we're here we're going to construct the copy.
So we're going right back here we're delegating to the constructor.
We're going to create another 10.
And it says here we just deep copy that 10 which is exactly what we did.
Now we're back here and we need to destroy that copy we made.
So the destructor will be called right now you can see it data will be pointing to 10 and we're going
to destroy that copy of 10.
That's it.
That's pretty much exactly what's happening.
You can see that we're using copy constructors just like we've used all the time.
Now the fact that this is an R-value that comes into play when we use the move constructor.
Now I'm going to stop this and I'm going to uncomment out all of these here you can see what's happening
it might be a little surprising.
So what I've done is I've pushed back 10 20 all the way through 18.
Remember these are all creating temporary objects.
So there are going to be copying copy constructed so that the vector can push them back.
Remember the vector makes copies of these guys so it's going to make a copy of the temp.
That's that's one of the problems that's why it's so inefficient but it's even worse than that because
if we run this without debugging this is build and run.
Let's take a look at what we just got here.
I'm going to scroll all the way to the top.
I'm at the top now so you can see that I've created that 10 right and I've copied it up done a deep
copy that I'm destroying it and doing the same thing for 20.
So you could see all these deep copies but if you count them you've got one two three four five six
seven eight nine down at 10
about 15 deep copies.
That's much more than you would expect.
Right.
When you look at the code I don't think you would expect that many.
I mean there's only 8 pushbacks here.
But what's going on is that the vector is actually growing behind the scenes and when the vector grows
those objects need to be copied to the new storage.
Remember the vector is using contiguous storage.
So it's making copies of the objects behind the scenes as well.
So you can see that a lot of times is a lot of copying going on behind the scenes that we're not aware
of.
So that's the version with the copy constructor.
Now what we'll do is we'll uncomment out the move constructor and you can see what the move constructor
is doing the same thing that we did on the slides.
The move constructor simply copying the source data and knowing that the pointer really really straightforward
and uncomment out the prototype here OK.
Now what we'll do is we'll debug this again.
And we'll walk through that very first once you can see what's happening.
So I'm right here on line 55.
I need to create that move object right.
That's a regular constructor to create that that creates that temporary R-value.
So let's walk through there.
I'm going to create that 10 object that 10 move object.
Now notice what happened.
The move constructor got called that's the move constructor right there with the double ampersand.
So we got called rather than the copy constructor why because this is an R-value temporary.
Now what we're going to do is we're basically mis steal the data and not the pointer to the source object.
Right so we're going to move it rather than copy it.
So we're here and we're sourcing winnowing out the source data and you can see the move constructor
got called.
Now look what happens when I go to delete that object.
Right the one that we just moved the source were here and the destructor just said we would expect.
But if you look at the object we're destroying.
Notice it's unknow the data isn't all that's on we just no doubt.
Right.
So in this case I'm simply saying destructor freen data for null pointer.
So that's really obvious which one is being destroyed.
And then at this point I'm back here.
OK so you can hopefully see the difference here.
How much more efficient this is.
And I think you'll really see the difference in efficiency when we just run it without the debugger.
So let me just run that without the debugger and you can see here I get I'll scroll all the way to the
top.
You can see that as you scroll down here there is not one single copy constructor being called so we're
doing no DB copies.
We're only moving resources using the move constructor.
OK so there you go.
That's a introduction to move constructors and move semantics.
And I think this is a pretty good example that you can walk through and understand what's going on.